Bioterrorism is the use of microorganisms or toxins by terrorist or extremists' groups to produce weapons which cause death and disease [@jansen2014biological]. The use of biological agents (Bioweapons) to cause harm or death is not a new concept; countries have been engaging in bioterrorism for hundreds of years. Infectious diseases were recognized for their potential impact on people and armies as early as 600 BC. The crude use of filth and cadavers, animal carcasses, and contagion had devastating effects and weakened the enemy. Polluting wells and other sources of water of the opposing army was a common strategy that continued to be used through the many European wars, during the American Civil War, and even into the 20th century [@riedel2004biological]. More recently, an attack using anthrax-laden letters mailed to media organizations and politicians [@pal2017overview]. Progress made in biotechnology and biochemistry has simplified the development and production of such biological weapons [@riedel2004biological], thus it is predicted that proliferation of Bioweapons will increase in the next decades. Bacterial and plant protein toxins are among the most powerful poisons known and are considered as potential agents used for bioterrorism and warfare [@duracova2018proteomic]. Biodefense strategies which include early and accurate threat detection are essential in mounting a successful response to bioterrorism. Mass spectrometry (MS) can be utilized in all stages of such a response: from Bioweapon detectors to accurate forensics classification for successful prosecution [@demirev2008mass].

MS is currently the most comprehensive method for the quantification of proteins [@sinha2020beginner]. It provides a valuable tool for law enforcement's forensic sample analysis. The accuracy of MS can also distinguish between similar compounds and organisms such as the castor bean vs the derrivative toxin Ricin. Current methods, involving manual database searches, are slow, and depend on expert knowledge. Automated solutions produce effective results for non-experts and narrow the search field for experts to perform more in-depth analysis. We must refine software and methods, improving accuracy and efficiency to combat the Bioweapon threat.

Here we focus on bottom-up proteomics where proteins are digested into smaller peptides, which are analyzed by MS. MS detect the presence and quantity of peptides using properties of mass and net-charge. Mass spectrometers can only analyze gaseous ions, therefore peptides are converted into peptide ions which are separated by their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z).

Samples are prepared for MS by digesting the long polypeptide chains using protease enzymes such as Trypsin, Chymotrypsin or Pepsin. These break proteins into smaller peptides which can be measured by MS. Protease digestion acts to normalize and compartmentalize the biochemical heterogeneity of proteins within a sample as peptides and may create a less heterogeneous mixture when protein splice isoforms and post-translational modifications are considered [@zhang2013protein]. One consideration due to the sensitivity of the MS analysis is that contaminant proteins will appear from Trypsin and human interaction and must be removed from analysis.  Contaminants include human skin or animal proteins from the digesting enzyme.

Bioinformatics analysis of MS output involves comparing matching the spectral output data from a sample with the theoretical spectra predicted from known genome or amino acid sequences contained in databases [@pere2020hood].  Amino Acid (AA) sequences  of the peptides are determined  using PEAKS® or Novor de-novo sequencing software. The MARLOWE software tool, developed at the Pacific Northwest National Lab (PNNL), to automate this database searching, producing a list of potential candidate compounds or organisms and likelihood scores for each candidate. MARLOWE is an R-Markdown application where the user adjusts a few input parameters to control sensitivity and set sample data input file names. It then performs analysis and generates documents to show the candidate scoring. In testing the MARLOWE search with a sample of the toxin, abrin, no matches were found as this compound was missing from the database.
